---
title: Bootcamp Day 1 Lesson Plan
description: Day 1 content for the Willston Web coding bootcamp
---

## Web Delivery Game

### Materials

- Colored tape or yarn: floor as the network paths between computers
- Yarn: connections between computers for each message
- Paper labels: for each computer address and the network path names
- Paper cards: for the action and address/message cards

### Roles

- Messenger: in charge of delivering messages from their “home” computer to
  others. They must take the message and string starting at their home and
  running it to the new computer
- Switcher: center of all the computers. This person must read the message and
  direct the messenger to the right path, taping their string below them to
  indicate the messenger checked with them first before continuing on to the
  final destination
- Computer: in charge of pulling action cards and messages. This person works
  with the messenger to deliver all their messages and hold old string for each
  message that is sent

### How to Play

Objective: deliver messages and complete actions first

1. Place tape and labels on the floor in the classroom to establish where the
   paths, computers, and switch should stand. It should look similar to a wheel
   with spokes.
2. Team up in teams of two: one messenger per computer
   - If limited people: one messenger per two computers.
   - Switch can be a student or instructor depending on group size
      - You can have 2 switches for a large group, which might be better so
        messengers can choose which switch is more available like a real
        computer network!
3. Each team receives a stack of action cards face down and a stack of messages
   face down, which they need to deliver
4. Each team pulls one message and one action card on each turn
5. The messenger executes the action and delivery
    - They must hold the string attached to their computer and go to the switch,
      receive direction and go to the computer
6. The switch must read the address and point the messenger in the right
   direction while taping the messenger's string on the ground at their feet
7. Messengers give their message to the computer at the destination and tape
   string to the ground at their feet
8. The receiving computer puts the message in a discard pile.
9. Once a message has been delivered and the full action is complete, the team
   can cut their string and tape it at their feet
10. Repeat steps 3-10 until the queue is empty
11. The first team to empty the queue wins!

### Actions

- Delete message
- Place message at the bottom of your stack
- Deliver message after the next message gets delivered
- Deliver message now
- Deliver message and return with a response (the message at the top of the
  other computer's stack)
    - If the receiving computer is already has no messages left, use a discarded
      message

### Messages

1. State the address
2. Generic message such as: “You’ve got mail!”

## Discussion

- What are we going to do this week?
- Why did you sign up?
- What do you know about HTML?
- What do you want to learn?
- What will you be able to do at the end of the week?

## Learning How to Use Pop!_OS

1. Connect to WiFi
2. Open Firefox
    - Use the `Launcher`:
        - Press the `SUPER` key, which is usually is the Windows or
          `⌘`/`Command`/`Cmd` key (recommended method)
        - Click the launcher icon in the Dock
        - Select `Applications` in the upper left corner
3. Visit [willston.org/curriculum] to follow along with the steps
    - You can find the link to this page by clicking "Bootcamp Objectives" and
      finding the link that says "Day 1"
4. Open the `Pop!_Shop`
5. Install `Visual Studio Code` by clicking the search icon in the upper right
   corner

## Block A: Hello World Example

### Demonstration

- Physical example of an `index.html` file
    - Folder = directory
    - Paper = file
    - Cut out pieces of paper = tags
- Hello World example

### Students Do Hello World Example Themselves

1. Create a `~/Code` directory
    1. Open the `Files` application
    2. Make sure `Home` is selected on the left
    3. Create a folder named `Code`. There are three ways to do this:
        - `Shift+Ctrl+N` (recommended method)
        - Right click > New Folder
        - Hamburger menu > folder icon with `+` in the middle
2. Create a `hello-world` directory inside of the `~/Code` directory
    1. Open the `~/Code` directory by double clicking on `Code`
    2. Create a folder called `hello-world`
3. Create an `index.html` file inside `~/Code/hello-world`
    1. Open the `Visual Studio Code` application
    3. Close all open tabs by pressing `Ctrl+W` on the keyboard
    4. Open the `~/Code/hello-world` directory using one of two methods:
        - Pressing `Ctrl+K` and then `Ctrl+O` right after (recommended method)
        - File > Open Folder
    5. Make sure `Home` is selected on the left
    6. Double click on `Code`
    7. Double click on `hello-world`
    8. Select `Open`
    9. Trust the authors of the files in this directory
        1. Select the checkbox next to the text: `Trust the authors of all files in the
           parent folder 'Code'`
        2. Select `Yes, I trust the authors`
    10. Create a new file by selecting the file icon with the `+` sign
    11. Copy and paste the following text into your `index.html` file:
        ```html
        <html>
            <body>
                <h1>Hello world!</h1>
            </body>
        </html>
        ```
    12. Save the file (`Ctrl+S`)
    13. Open the file
        1. Open the `Files` application
        2. Make sure `Home` is selected on the left
        3. Open the `Code` directory
        4. Open the `hello-world` directory
        5. Right click on `index.html`
        6. Select `Open With Other Application`
        7. Select `View All Applications`
        8. Scroll and select `Firefox Web Browser`
        9. Press `Select`

## Block B: Getting Started with freeCodeCamp

### Preparation

1. Create a GitHub account
2. Sign in to [freeCodeCamp] with a GitHub account

[freeCodeCamp]: https://freecodecamp.org

### Instruction

- What are tags?
    - Opening tag
    - Closing tag
    - Self closing tag

### Learn HTML by Building a Cat Photo App: Steps 1-10

<div class="youtube">
    <iframe src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/000J78R6QUA" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

#### What are headers?

- Demonstration: example site using multiple headers
- Practice: steps 1 and 2

#### What is a paragraph?

- Demonstration: add paragraphs to example site
- Practice: step 3

#### What is a comment?

- Demonstration: comment out one line on example site, then comment out an
  entire section
- Practice: step 4

#### What is search engine optimization?

- Demonstration:
    - When you search something up, do you click to the next page?
    - Why does Apple, the company show up before apple, the fruit when you
      search for `apple` on a search engine?
- Practice: step 5

#### What is indentation?

- Demonstration: show final code of the Learn HTML by Building a Cat Photo App
  project without indentation and with indentation
- Practice: step 6

#### How do I add images in HTML?

- Demonstration:
    - Paper example pulling in an image to demonstrate the `src` attribute
    - Words describing the image behind to demonstration the `alt` attribute
    - What is a screen reader?
    - What is an HTML attribute?
- Practice: steps 7-9

#### How do I add a link in HTML?

- Demonstration: add a link to the example site
- Practice: step 10

[willston.org/curriculum]: /
